


3





Mental Representations


ON APRIL 27, 1924, shortly before 2:00 p.m., the Russian grandmaster Alexander Alekhine settled into a comfortable leather chair at the front of a large room in the Hotel Alamac in New York City and prepared to play twenty-six of the best chess players in the area. The challengers sat at two long tables behind Alekhine. In front of each challenger was a chessboard on which that player’s game with Alekhine would be played out. Alekhine could see none of the boards. Each time a player made a move, a runner would call out the board number and the move loudly enough that Alekhine could hear it, and then, once Alekhine announced his response, the runner would make Alekhine’s move for him on the appropriate board.

Twenty-six boards, 832 individual pieces, and 1,664 individual squares to keep track of—all without taking notes or having any sort of memory aid—and yet Alekhine never stumbled. The demonstration went on for more than twelve hours, with a short break for dinner, and when the last game was finished, shortly after two o’clock in the morning, Alekhine had won sixteen, lost five, and played to a draw in five more.

This sort of chess game, in which one of the players—and sometimes both—cannot see the chessboard and must play from memory, is called “blindfold chess” even if there is no literal blindfold involved. Chess masters have been playing blindfolded for more than a thousand years, mostly as a way of showing off, although sometimes as a way of handicapping themselves when playing less-skilled opponents. Some of these old chess masters would even play blindfolded against two, three, or four opponents simultaneously, but it wasn’t until the late nineteenth century that a few grandmasters began to get really serious with it, playing a dozen or more opponents at once. The current record is forty-six boards, set in 2011 by Marc Lang of Germany, with twenty-five wins, two losses, and nineteen draws. Nonetheless, Alekhine’s exhibition in 1924 is still generally considered to be the most impressive simultaneous blindfold match ever because of the quality of his challengers and the number of his wins against such stiff competition.

Blindfold chess offers one of the most dramatic examples of what is possible to accomplish with purposeful practice. And learning a bit about blindfold chess can give us a clear idea of the sorts of neurological changes that arise from such practice.



THE ACCIDENTAL BLINDFOLD CHESS MASTER



Although Alekhine became interested in blindfold chess at an early age and played his first blindfold game when he was twelve, the vast majority of his training throughout his life was devoted not to blindfold chess but simply to chess.

Alekhine, who was born in October 1892, started playing chess when he was seven. By the time he was ten, he was playing in correspondence tournaments, and he would spend much of each day analyzing the positions in detail, even while he was in school. Because he could not bring a chessboard with him to class, he would write the position he was studying down on a piece of paper and puzzle over it during school hours. Once in an algebra class he suddenly stood up with a big smile on his face. “Well, have you solved it?” his teacher asked, referring to the algebra problem that the class had been assigned. “Yes,” Alekhine responded, “I sacrifice the knight, the bishop moves, . . . and White wins!”

He first became interested in blindfold chess around the same time as he began playing in correspondence tournaments. The event that triggered Alekhine’s interest in blindfold chess was a 1902 exhibition in Moscow by the U.S. chess champion Harry Nelson Pillsbury, who set a world record at that exhibition by playing twenty-two games simultaneously. As Alekhine would later tell it, his brother Alexei was one of Pillsbury’s opponents that day, although the records of the match that we have today hold no indication that Alexei actually played. Either way, though, the demonstration made a serious impression on the young Alekhine, and a couple of years later he began to try blindfold chess himself. It was, he later wrote, a natural outgrowth of his habit of thinking about chess positions while he was in the classroom. At first he would sketch out positions and use the sketches to work out the best moves, but eventually he found that he could study the positions just as well without the diagrams—that he could hold the entire chessboard in his memory and move pieces around in his mind, trying various lines of play.

Over time Alekhine got to the point where he could play whole games in his mind with no need to look at a chessboard, and, as he got older, he began to play multiple blindfold games in the spirit of Pillsbury’s demonstration. At sixteen he could do four or five blindfold games simultaneously, but he didn’t pursue it any further, choosing instead to focus on improving his play in standard games. By this point it was clear to him that if he worked hard enough, he could become one of the best chess players in the world. And Alekhine, who had never lacked confidence in his abilities at chess, saw no reason to stop at the “one of the” part of that description. His goal was to be the best player, period—the World Chess Champion.

Alekhine was well on his way toward that goal when the First World War began, an interruption that rekindled his interest in blindfold chess. In early August 1914, Alekhine and many other chess masters were playing at a major tournament in Berlin when Germany declared war on both Russia and France. Many of the foreign chess players were interned, and Alekhine found himself in a prison with half a dozen of Russia’s other best chess players—but with no chessboards. So until they were released back to Russia—for Alekhine it was more than a month—the chess masters entertained themselves by playing each other in games of blindfold chess.

Once back in Russia, Alekhine served with a Red Cross unit on the Austrian front, where in 1916 he suffered a serious injury to his spine and was captured by the Austrians. The Austrians kept him chained to a bed in a hospital for several months as his back healed. Once again he had little but chess to entertain himself, and he arranged for a number of local players to visit and play against him. During that time he regularly played blindfold games, perhaps to handicap himself against his less-skilled opponents. Once he returned to Russia, Alekhine again neglected blindfold chess until after he emigrated to Paris in 1921.

At this point Alekhine was actively seeking the World Chess Championship, and he needed some way to support himself during that quest. One of his few options was to give chess demonstrations, and so he began performing simultaneous blindfold matches. The first one he held in Paris was against twelve opponents, which were three or four more than he had ever played. At the end of 1923 he was in Montreal and decided to try to break the North American record for simultaneous blindfold chess games. The North American record at the time was twenty games, held by Pillsbury, so Alekhine played twenty-one. It went well, so he decided to go for the world record, which at the time was twenty-five games. That led to the demonstration at the Hotel Alamac. Over the coming years Alekhine would set the world record twice more—with twenty-eight games in 1925 and thirty-two games in 1933—but he always contended that blindfold chess was little more than a way of bringing attention to the game of chess and, of course, to himself. It was never something that he made a special effort to develop, but rather something that grew out of his relentless effort to master the game and become the best in the world.

Alekhine eventually reached his goal, defeating José Raúl Capablanca in 1927 for the world championship. He held that title until 1935 and then again from 1937 to 1946, and many rankings place Alekhine among the ten best chess players of all time. But when people rank the greatest blindfold chess players of all time, Alekhine’s name is generally at the very top of the list—even though blindfold chess was never his main focus.

If we look at the overall history of blindfold chess, we find that this same thing is true for most blindfold chess players throughout history. They worked to become chess masters, and they found themselves, with little or no additional effort, able to play blindfolded.

At first glance, the way that so many grandmasters develop the ability to play blindfold chess might seem nothing more than an artifact, an interesting footnote to the history of chess. But if you look more closely, you find that this connection is actually a clue pointing toward the particular mental processes that set chess masters apart from chess novices and make possible their incredible ability to analyze chess positions and zero in on the best moves. Furthermore, the same sorts of highly developed mental processes are seen in expert performers in every field and hold the key to understanding their extraordinary abilities.

Before we delve into this, however, let us take a quick detour to examine in more detail the sort of memory that chess experts have for pieces arranged on a chessboard.



THE SECRET TO WINNING CHESS



Beginning in the early 1970s researchers sought to understand how grandmasters remember chess positions with such accuracy. The earliest studies were done by my mentor, Herb Simon, working with Bill Chase, who would later be my collaborator in my studies of Steve Faloon’s digit-span memory.

It was already known that grandmasters, given just a few seconds to study a chessboard as it appears in the middle of a game, will remember correctly the position of most of the pieces and be able to reproduce the most important areas of the board almost perfectly. This ability seemed to defy the well-known limits of short-term memory. By contrast, someone who is just beginning to play chess can remember the positions of only a handful of pieces and can’t come close to reconstructing the arrangement of pieces on the board.

Herb and Bill asked a simple question: Are chess experts recalling the position of each piece, or are they actually remembering patterns, where the individual pieces are seen as part of a larger whole? To answer that question Herb and Bill carried out a simple but effective experiment. They tested a national-level chess player (i.e., a chess master), a mid-range chess player, and a chess novice on two types of boards, one that had the pieces arranged in a pattern taken from a real chess game, and the other with a random jumble of pieces of the sort that made no chess sense at all.

When shown chessboards with a dozen to two dozen pieces arranged in a pattern from the middle or the end of a chess game, the master could remember the positions of about two-thirds of the pieces after five seconds of study, the novice could remember only about four, and the mid-range player was somewhere in the middle. When shown chessboards with the pieces arrayed randomly, the novice player did somewhat worse—only about two pieces correct. No surprise there. What was surprising, however, was that neither the mid-range player nor the chess master did much better than the novice in remembering the positions of pieces arranged randomly on a board. They too got only about two or three pieces right. The experienced players’ advantage had disappeared. More recent studies of large groups of chess players have reiterated the original findings.

Something very similar has been shown with verbal memory. If you ask someone to recall a seemingly random assortment of words verbatim, starting with the first word—“was smelled front that his the peanuts he good hunger eating barely woman of so in could that him contain”—the average person will remember only the first six of those words. If, however, you read the same words rearranged into a sentence that makes clear sense—“The woman in front of him was eating peanuts that smelled so good that he could barely contain his hunger”—some adults will remember all of the words in perfect order, and most people will remember most of the sentence. What’s the difference? The second arrangement carries meaning that allows us to make sense of the words using preexisting “mental representations.” They’re not random; they mean something, and meaning aids memory. Similarly, chess masters don’t develop some incredible memory for where individual pieces sit on a board. Instead, their memory is very context-dependent: it is only for patterns of the sort that would appear in a normal game.

The ability to recognize and remember meaningful patterns arises from the way chess players develop their abilities. Anyone who is serious about developing skills on the chessboard will do it mainly by spending countless hours studying games played by the masters. You analyze a position in depth, predicting the next move, and if you get it wrong, you go back and figure out what you missed. Research has shown that the amount of time spent in this sort of analysis—not the amount of time spent playing chess with others—is the single most important predictor of a chess player’s ability. It generally takes about ten years of this sort of practice to reach the level of grandmaster.

These years of practice make it possible for chess players to recognize patterns of chess pieces—not just their positions, but the interactions among them—at a glance. They are old friends. Bill Chase and Herb Simon called these patterns “chunks,” and the important thing about them is that they are held in long-term memory.

Simon estimated that by the time a chess player becomes a master, he or she has accumulated some fifty thousand of these chunks. A master who examines a chess position sees a collection of chunks that are interacting with other chunks in still other patterns. Research has shown that these chunks are organized hierarchically, with groups of chunks arranged into higher-level patterns. The hierarchy is analogous to the organizational structure of a business or other large institution, with individuals organized into teams, which are organized into units, which are organized into departments, and so on, with the higher-level pieces being more abstracted and further from the bottom level where the real action takes place (which, in the case of the chess example, is the level of the individual chess pieces).

The way that grandmasters process and make sense of chess positions is an example of a mental representation. It is their way of “seeing” the board, and it’s quite different from how a novice would see the same board.

When asked what they see when they are mentally examining a chess position, grandmasters do not talk about visualizing the physical chess pieces on a board as they would if they were relying on some sort of “photographic memory” of the position. This would be a “bottom-level” representation. Instead, their descriptions are much more vague, sprinkled with such terms as “lines of force” and “power.” A key thing about these representations is that they allow a chess player to encode the positions of pieces on the board in a much more efficient way than simply remembering which piece is on which square. This efficient encoding underlies a master’s ability to glance at a chessboard and remember the positions of most of the pieces and, in particular, the ability to play blindfold chess.

Two other features of these representations are worth noting, for they are examples of themes that will appear again and again as we explore the broader world of mental representations.

First, the mental representations are more than just ways of encoding positions. They allow a chess master to glance at a game in progress and get an immediate sense of which side has the advantage, which directions the game might take, and what a good move or moves might be. This is because the representations include, in addition to the positions of the pieces and the interactions between them, the various weaknesses and strengths of the two players’ positions and moves that are likely to be effective in such positions. One of the things that most clearly sets grandmasters apart from novices or mid-range players is their ability to devise much better potential moves when they first examine a position.

The second notable characteristic of these mental representations is that while a chess master will initially analyze a position in terms of general patterns—which is enough when playing a lesser opponent—the representations also allow the master to zero in on individual pieces and mentally move them around the board to see how such moves would change the patterns. So the master can quickly examine strings of possible moves and countermoves in great detail, looking for the particular move that will offer the best chance of winning. In short, while the mental representations give masters a view of the forest that novices lack, they also allow masters to zero in on the trees when necessary.



MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS



Mental representations aren’t just for chess masters; we all use them constantly. A mental representation is a mental structure that corresponds to an object, an idea, a collection of information, or anything else, concrete or abstract, that the brain is thinking about. A simple example is a visual image. Mention the Mona Lisa, for instance, and many people will immediately “see” an image of the painting in their minds; that image is their mental representation of the Mona Lisa. Some people’s representations are more detailed and accurate than others, and they can report, for example, details about the background, about where Mona Lisa is sitting, and about her hairstyle and her eyebrows.

A somewhat more complex example of a mental representation is a word—dog, for example. Suppose you’ve never heard of a dog and never seen anything like it. Perhaps you’ve grown up in some isolated place—a desert island, say—where there are no four-legged animals of any sort, only birds and fish and insects. When you’re first introduced to the concept of dog, it is all just isolated data, and the word dog doesn’t really mean much to you; it is just a label for this collection of disconnected knowledge. Dogs are furry, they have four legs, they are meat eaters, they run in packs, the little ones are called puppies, they can be trained, and so on. Gradually, however, as you spend time around dogs and start to understand them, all this information becomes integrated into one holistic concept that is represented by the word dog. Now when you hear that word, you don’t have to search your memory banks to remember all the various details about dogs; instead, all that information is immediately accessible. You have added dog not only to your vocabulary but to your set of mental representations.

Much of deliberate practice involves developing ever more efficient mental representations that you can use in whatever activity you are practicing. When Steve Faloon was training to improve his ability to remember long strings of digits, he developed increasingly sophisticated ways to encode those digits mentally—that is, he created mental representations. When London taxi trainees are learning to navigate efficiently from every point A to every point B in the city, they do it by developing increasingly sophisticated mental maps of the city—that is, by making mental representations.

Even when the skill being practiced is primarily physical, a major factor is the development of the proper mental representations. Consider a competitive diver working on a new dive. Much of the practice is devoted to forming a clear mental picture of what the dive should look like at every moment and, more importantly, what it should feel like in terms of body positioning and momentum. Of course, the deliberate practice will also lead to physical changes in the body itself—in divers, the development of the legs, abdominal muscles, back, and shoulders, among other body parts—but without the mental representations necessary to produce and control the body’s movements correctly, the physical changes would be of no use.

A key fact about such mental representations is that they are very “domain specific,” that is, they apply only to the skill for which they were developed. We saw this with Steve Faloon: the mental representations he had devised to remember strings of digits did nothing to improve his memory for strings of letters. Similarly, a chess player’s mental representations will give him or her no advantage over others in tests involving general visuospatial abilities, and a diver’s mental representations will be useless for basketball.

This explains a crucial fact about expert performance in general: there is no such thing as developing a general skill. You don’t train your memory; you train your memory for strings of digits or for collections of words or for people’s faces. You don’t train to become an athlete; you train to become a gymnast or a sprinter or a marathoner or a swimmer or a basketball player. You don’t train to become a doctor; you train to become a diagnostician or a pathologist or a neurosurgeon. Of course, some people do become overall memory experts or athletes in a number of sports or doctors with a general set of skills, but they do so by training in a number of different areas.

Because the details of mental representations can differ dramatically from field to field, it’s hard to offer an overarching definition that is not too vague, but in essence these representations are preexisting patterns of information—facts, images, rules, relationships, and so on—that are held in long-term memory and that can be used to respond quickly and effectively in certain types of situations. The thing all mental representations have in common is that they make it possible to process large amounts of information quickly, despite the limitations of short-term memory. Indeed, one could define a mental representation as a conceptual structure designed to sidestep the usual restrictions that short-term memory places on mental processing.

The best example of this that we have seen is Steve Faloon’s ability to recall as many as eighty-two digits when only seven or eight digits would have been possible if he’d had to rely on short-term memory alone. He did it by encoding the digits he was hearing, three or four at a time, into meaningful memories in his long-term memory and then associating these memories with the retrieval structure, which allowed him to remember which digit group followed which. To do all this he needed mental representations not just for the three- and four-digit groups of numbers that he was holding on to but also for the retrieval structure itself, which he visualized as a sort of two-dimensional tree with the three- and four-digit groups placed at the ends of the individual branches.

But memorizing lists of things is just the simplest example of how short-term memory comes into play in our lives. We constantly have to hold on to and process many pieces of information simultaneously: the words in a sentence whose meaning we are figuring out, the positions of the pieces on a chessboard, or the different factors we must take into account when driving a car, such as our own speed and momentum, the positions and speeds of other vehicles, the road conditions and visibility, where our foot must be to hit the accelerator or brake, how much force to apply to the pedals, how quickly to turn the steering wheel, and so on. Any relatively complicated activity requires holding more information in our heads than short-term memory allows, so we are always building mental representations of one sort or another without even being aware of it. Indeed, without mental representations we couldn’t walk (too many muscle movements to coordinate), we couldn’t talk (ditto on the muscle movements, plus no understanding of the words), we couldn’t live any sort of human life.

So everyone has and uses mental representations. What sets expert performers apart from everyone else is the quality and quantity of their mental representations. Through years of practice, they develop highly complex and sophisticated representations of the various situations they are likely to encounter in their fields—such as the vast number of arrangements of chess pieces that can appear during games. These representations allow them to make faster, more accurate decisions and respond more quickly and effectively in a given situation. This, more than anything else, explains the difference in performance between novices and experts.

Consider how professional baseball players are able to consistently hit balls that are pitched toward them at speeds that may exceed ninety miles per hour—something that’s impossible for anyone who hasn’t spent years training in that particular skill. These hitters have just a split second to decide whether to swing and, if so, where to swing. They have no better eyesight than an average person, and their reflexes are no faster. What they have is a set of mental representations developed through years of hitting pitches and getting immediate feedback about their expectations concerning a pitch. These representations enable them to quickly recognize what sort of pitch is coming and where it will likely be when it reaches them. As soon as they see the pitcher’s arm come around and the ball leave his hand, they have a very good idea—without having to do any sort of conscious calculations—whether it will be a fastball, slider, or curve and approximately where it’s heading. In essence, they’ve learned to read the pitcher’s delivery, so they have less need to actually see how the ball travels before determining whether and where to swing the bat. The rest of us, who are illiterate where pitching is concerned, simply can’t make these decisions before the ball arrives in the catcher’s mitt.

So here is a major part of the answer to the question we asked at the end of the last chapter: What exactly is being changed in the brain with deliberate practice? The main thing that sets experts apart from the rest of us is that their years of practice have changed the neural circuitry in their brains to produce highly specialized mental representations, which in turn make possible the incredible memory, pattern recognition, problem solving, and other sorts of advanced abilities needed to excel in their particular specialties.

The best way to understand exactly what these mental representations are and how they work is, fittingly enough, to develop a good mental representation of the concept mental representation. And just as was the case with dog, the best way to develop a mental representation of mental representations is to spend a little time getting to know them, stroking their fur, patting their little heads, and watching as they perform their tricks.



RECOGNIZING AND RESPONDING TO PATTERNS



In pretty much every area, a hallmark of expert performance is the ability to see patterns in a collection of things that would seem random or confusing to people with less well developed mental representations. In other words, experts see the forest when everyone else sees only trees.

This is perhaps most obvious in team sports. Take soccer, for instance. You have eleven players on a side moving around in a way that to the uninitiated seems a swirling chaos with no discernible pattern beyond the obvious fact that some players are drawn to the soccer ball whenever it comes near. To those who know and love the game, however, and particularly to those who play the game well, this chaos is no chaos at all. It is all a beautifully nuanced and constantly shifting pattern created as the players move in response to the ball and the movements of the other players. The best players recognize and respond to the patterns almost instantaneously, taking advantage of weaknesses or openings as soon as they appear.

To study this phenomenon, I and two colleagues, Paul Ward and Mark Williams, investigated how well soccer players can predict what’s coming next from what has already happened on the field. To do this we showed them videos of real soccer matches and suddenly stopped the video when a player had just received the ball. Then we asked our subjects to predict what would happen next. Would the player with the ball keep it, attempt a shot at the goal, or pass the ball to a teammate? We found that the more accomplished players were much better at deciding what the player with the ball should do. We also tested the players’ memory for where the relevant players were located and in what directions they were moving by asking them to recall as much as they could from the last frame of the video before it was hidden from them. Again, the better players outperformed the weaker ones.

We concluded that the advantage better players had in predicting future events was related to their ability to envision more possible outcomes and quickly sift through them and come up with the most promising action. In short, the better players had a more highly developed ability to interpret the pattern of action on the field. This ability allowed them to perceive which players’ movements and interactions mattered most, which allowed them to make better decisions about where to go on the field, when to pass the ball and to whom, and so on.

Something very similar is true for football, although it is mainly the quarterback who needs to develop mental representations of events on the field. This explains why the most successful quarterbacks are generally the ones who spend the most time in the film room, watching and analyzing the plays of their own team and their opponents. The best quarterbacks keep track of what’s happening everywhere on the field, and after the game they can generally recall most of the game’s plays, providing detailed descriptions of the movements of many players on each team. More importantly, effective mental representations allow a quarterback to make good decisions quickly: whether to pass the ball, whom to pass to, when to pass, and so on. Being able to make the right decision a tenth of a second faster can be the difference between a good play and a disastrous one—between, say, a completed pass and an interception.

Another important fact about mental representations was shown in a 2014 study by German researchers who looked at indoor rock climbing. In this sport, which is designed to mimic and serve as training for outdoor rock climbing, one must climb a vertical wall using various handholds. These holds require different kinds of grips, including an open grip, a pocket grip, a sideways pull, and a crimp grip. For each grip, the climber must position his or her hands and fingers differently. If you use the wrong grip on a handhold, you’re more likely to fall.

Using standard psychological techniques, the researchers examined what was going on in the brains of climbers when they surveyed the various holds. They first noted that, unlike novices, experienced climbers automatically identified each hold according to the type of grip it required. In their mental representations of the various holds, all of the holds that required a crimp grip, for instance, were put together in one group and were distinguished from the holds that required, say, a pocket grip, which were themselves mentally put into a separate group. This grouping was done unconsciously, just as you can look at a poodle and Great Dane and know instantly they are both members of the same category without ever actually saying to yourself, “Those are both dogs.”

In other words, experienced climbers had developed mental representations of holds that allowed them to know without conscious thought what sort of grip was required for each hold they saw. Furthermore, the researchers found that when experienced climbers saw a particular hold, their brains sent a signal to their hands preparing them to form the corresponding grip—again, without conscious thought. The inexperienced climbers had to consciously figure out the appropriate grip for each hold. The ability of experienced climbers to automatically analyze holds using a mental representation allows them to climb more quickly and with less chance of falling. Again, better mental representations lead to better performance.



MAKING SENSE OF INFORMATION



For the experts we just described, the key benefit of mental representations lies in how they help us deal with information: understanding and interpreting it, holding it in memory, organizing it, analyzing it, and making decisions with it. The same is true for all experts—and most of us are experts at something, whether we realize it or not.

For instance, most everyone reading this right now is an “expert” in reading, and to get to that level you had to develop certain mental representations. It began with learning the correspondence between letters and sounds. At that point reading was a matter of laboriously sounding out each word, letter by letter. With practice, you began to recognize entire words by themselves. C-A-T became simply cat, thanks to a mental representation that encoded the pattern of the letters in that word and associated that pattern with both the sound of the word and the idea of a small, furry animal that meows and often doesn’t get along well with dogs. Along with the mental representations for the words, you developed a variety of other representations that are essential in reading. You learned how to recognize the beginning and ending of a sentence so that you could break up the strings of words into chunks that had individual meaning, and you learned that certain things that looked like they signaled the end of a sentence—Mr., Ms., Dr., and so on—usually did not. You internalized various patterns that allow you to infer the meanings of words you have never seen before and to use context to make sense of things where a word is misspelled or misused or left out altogether. And now when you read, you do all of this unconsciously, the mental representations churning away under the surface, unnoticed but essential.

While almost all of you reading this are experts in reading, in the sense that you are fully capable of recognizing the marks on the page as corresponding to words and sentences in your language, some of you will be more expert than others in the task of understanding and assimilating the information contained in this book. And, again, this is related to how well your mental representations allow you to overcome the limitations of short-term memory and retain what you are reading.

To see why, consider what happens when you test a group of subjects by having them read a newspaper article on something a bit specialized—say, a football or baseball game—and then quiz them to see how much of it they remember. You might guess that the results would depend mainly on the subjects’ general verbal ability (which is closely related to IQ), but you’d be wrong. Studies have shown that the key factor determining a person’s comprehension of a story about a football or baseball game is how much that person already understands about the sport.

The reason is straightforward: If you don’t know much about the sport, then all of the details you read are essentially a bunch of unrelated facts, and remembering them is not much easier than remembering a list of random words. But if you understand the sport, you’ve already established a mental structure for making sense of it, organized the information, and combined it with all the other relevant information you’ve already assimilated. The new information becomes part of an ongoing story, and as such it moves quickly and easily into your long-term memory, allowing you to remember far more of the information in an article than you could if you were unfamiliar with the game it describes.

The more you study a subject, the more detailed your mental representations of it become, and the better you get at assimilating new information. Thus a chess expert can look at a series of moves in chess notation that are gibberish to most people—1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 . . .—and follow and understand an entire game. Similarly, an expert musician can look at a musical score for a new composition and know what it will sound like before ever playing it. And if you are a reader who is already familiar with the concept of deliberate practice or with the broader area of the psychology of learning, you will likely find it easier than other readers to assimilate the information in this book. Either way, reading this book and thinking about the topics I’m discussing will help you create new mental representations, which will in turn make it easier for you to read and learn more about this subject in the future.



FINDING AN ANSWER



Every so often the New York Times publishes a column called “Think Like a Doctor” by Lisa Sanders, a doctor and author. Each column poses a medical mystery, a real case that initially puzzled the clinicians who encountered it—the newspaper version of an episode of House M.D. Sanders gives the readers enough information to solve it themselves—assuming they have all the other tools they need, such as medical knowledge and the ability to reason from symptoms to diagnosis—and then invites answers. In a later column she reveals the correct answer, explains how the original doctors reached that answer, and announces how many readers got it right. These columns always draw hundreds of reader responses—and only a few correct ones.

For me the most fascinating thing about the column is not the medical mysteries or their solutions but rather the insights that the column offers into the diagnostic thought process. A doctor making a diagnosis, particularly in a complex case, is given a large number of facts about the patient’s condition and must absorb those facts and then combine them with relevant medical knowledge to come to a conclusion. This doctor must do at least three different things: assimilate facts about the patient, recall relevant medical knowledge, and use the facts and medical knowledge to identify possible diagnoses and choose the right one. For all of these activities, a more sophisticated mental representation makes the process faster and more efficient—and sometimes makes it possible, period.

To see how this works, I’ll borrow one of Sanders’s medical mysteries—one that only a handful of readers solved correctly, out of more than two hundred who sent in answers. A thirty-nine-year-old male police officer came to his doctor complaining of an intense earache—it felt like a knife in his ear—and noting that his right pupil was smaller than his left. He had had the earache once before and had visited an urgent-care center, where he was diagnosed with an infection and given a prescription for antibiotics. When it got better in a couple of days, he thought nothing more about it, but the earache reappeared two months later, and this time the antibiotics did no good. The doctor thought it was probably just a sinus infection, but because of the issue with the pupil, the patient was referred to an eye doctor. That doctor couldn’t make a diagnosis and referred the patient to a specialist. The specialist, a neuro-opthalmologist, immediately recognized the small pupil as a symptom of a particular syndrome but had no idea what might cause that syndrome in an otherwise healthy man—and how it all might be related to the intense ear pain. So he asked a number of questions: Have you felt weakness anywhere? What about numbness or tingling? Have you been lifting weights recently? When the patient replied that he had been lifting weights for several months, the doctor asked one more question: Had he experienced any serious pain in his head or neck after lifting? Yes, he’d had an intense post-workout headache a couple of weeks earlier. The doctor could finally figure out what was wrong.

At first, the essential step in solving this mystery might seem to be recognizing what syndrome could cause one pupil to be smaller than the other, but this was actually pretty straightforward: it required having learned about that syndrome at some point and being able to recall its symptoms. It is called “Horner’s syndrome,” and it is caused by damage to a nerve that runs behind the eye. The damage hurts the eye’s ability to dilate and often limits the movement of the eyelid covering that eye—and, indeed, when the specialist looked closely, he could see that that eyelid was not opening fully. Several readers identified Horner’s syndrome correctly but were stymied by how that might be connected to the ear pain.

In this particular sort of challenge—piecing together a number of clues—the mental representations of expert doctors come to the fore. A doctor diagnosing a patient with a complex set of symptoms must take in a great deal of information without knowing ahead of time which is most relevant and which might be red herrings. It’s impossible to assimilate all that information as random facts—the limitations of short-term memory will not allow it—so it must be understood against the background of the relevant medical knowledge. But what is relevant? Before a diagnosis is made, it is difficult to know what the various bits of clinical information might imply and what sorts of medical conditions they might be related to.

Medical students, whose mental representations of diagnostic medicine are still rudimentary, tend to associate symptoms with the particular medical conditions that they’re familiar with and jump quickly to conclusions. They fail to generate multiple options. Even many less experienced doctors do the same thing. Thus, when the police officer went to the urgent-care clinic complaining of an earache, the doctor there assumed the problem was an infection of some sort—which would have been the correct answer in most cases—and didn’t worry about the seemingly irrelevant fact that one of the patient’s pupils was acting up.

Unlike medical students, expert diagnosticians have built sophisticated mental representations that let them consider a number of different facts at once, even facts that at first might not seem germane. This is a major advantage of highly developed mental representations: you can assimilate and consider a great deal more information at once. Research on expert diagnosticians has found that they tend to see symptoms and other relevant data not as isolated bits of information but as pieces of larger patterns—in much the same way that grandmasters see patterns among chess pieces rather than a random assortment of pieces.

And just as chess masters’ representations allow them to quickly generate a number of possible moves and then zero in on the best one, experienced diagnosticians come up with a number of possible diagnoses and then analyze the various alternatives to select the most likely one. Of course, the doctor may ultimately decide that none of the options work, but the process of reasoning through each of them may well have led to still other possibilities. This ability to generate a number of likely diagnoses and carefully reason through them distinguishes expert diagnosticians from the rest.

The solution to the medical mystery described in the New York Times required precisely that sort of approach: first come up with possible explanations for why a patient should have both Horner’s syndrome and a knifelike pain in the ear, and then analyze each possibility to find the right answer. Stroke was one possibility, but the patient had nothing in his background that indicated he might have had a stroke. Shingles could also produce the patient’s two symptoms, but he had none of the usual signs of shingles such as blisters or a rash. A third possibility was a tear in the wall of the carotid artery, which runs right alongside the nerve affected in Horner’s and also passes near the ear. A slight tear in the artery can allow blood to leak through the inner walls of the artery, causing a bulge in its outer wall, which can press on the nerve to the face and, in rare cases, also press on a nerve to the ear. With this in mind, the specialist asked the patient questions about lifting weights and headaches. It is known that weightlifting can sometimes tear the carotid artery, and such a tear would normally be associated with some sort of headache or neck pain. When the patient answered yes, the specialist decided that a tear in the carotid artery was the most likely diagnosis. An MRI scan verified that diagnosis, and the patient was put on blood thinners to prevent the formation of a blood clot and was told to avoid any sort of exertion for the several months that it would take the blood vessel to heal.

The key to the successful diagnosis wasn’t merely having the necessary medical knowledge, but having that knowledge organized and accessible in a way that allowed the doctor to come up with possible diagnoses and to zero in on the most likely. The superior organization of information is a theme that appears over and over again in the study of expert performers.

This is true even for something as mundane as insurance sales. A recent study examined knowledge about multiline insurance (life, home, auto, and commercial) in 150 agents. Not surprisingly, the highly successful agents—as determined by their sales volumes—knew more about the various insurance products than the less successful agents. But more to the point, researchers found that the highly successful agents had much more complex and integrated “knowledge structures”—what we’re calling mental representations—than the less successful agents. In particular, the better agents had much more highly developed “if . . . then” structures: if these things are true about a client, then say this or do that. Because their insurance knowledge was better organized, the best agents could figure out what to do more quickly and more accurately in any given situation, and this made them much more effective agents.



PLANNING



Before experienced rock climbers begin a climb, they will look over the entire wall and visualize the path they are going to take, seeing themselves moving from hold to hold. This ability to create a detailed mental representation of a climb before embarking on it is something that only comes with experience.

More generally, mental representations can be used to plan a wide variety of areas, and the better the representation, the more effective the planning.

Surgeons, for example, will often visualize an entire surgery before making the first incision. They use MRIs, CT scans, and other images to take a look inside the patient and identify potential trouble spots, then they devise a plan of attack. Developing such mental representations of a surgery is one of the most challenging—and most important—things that a surgeon can do, and more experienced surgeons generally create more sophisticated and more effective representations of these procedures. The representations not only guide the surgery, but they also serve to provide a warning when something unexpected and potentially dangerous happens in the surgery. When an actual surgery diverges from the surgeon’s mental representation, he or she knows to slow down, rethink the options, and, if necessary, formulate a new plan in response to the new information.

Relatively few of us climb rocks or perform surgeries, but almost everyone writes, and the process of writing offers us an excellent example of how mental representations can be used in planning. I myself have become quite familiar with this arena over the past couple of years as I’ve worked on Peak, and many of the people reading this book will have done some writing lately as well, whether it has been a personal letter or a business memo, a blog post or a book.

There has been quite a bit of research into the representations people use when writing, and the research has demonstrated a profound difference between the methods used by expert writers and those used by novices. Consider, for example, the answer that a sixth-grader offered when asked about the strategy he used in writing an essay:



I have a whole bunch of ideas and write down till my supply of ideas is exhausted. Then I might try to think of more ideas up to the point where you can’t get any more ideas that are worth putting down on paper and then I would end it.





This approach is actually pretty typical, not just for sixth-graders but for many people who don’t write for a living. The representation of the writing is simple and direct: there’s a topic and there are various thoughts that the writer has on the topic, often loosely organized by relevance or importance, but sometimes by category or some other pattern. A slightly more sophisticated representation might include some sort of introduction at the beginning and a conclusion or summary at the end, but that’s about it.

This approach to writing has been called “knowledge telling” because it is little more than telling the reader whatever comes into your head.

Expert writers do it very differently. Consider how my coauthor and I put this book together. First we had to figure out what we wanted the book to do. What did we want readers to learn about expertise? What concepts and ideas were important to introduce? How should a reader’s ideas about training and potential be changed by reading this book? Answering questions like these gave us our first rough mental representation of the book—our goals for it, what we wanted it to accomplish. Of course, as we worked more and more on the book, that initial image evolved, but it was a start.

Next we started sketching out how we would accomplish our goals for the book. What general topics did we need to cover? Obviously we needed to explain what deliberate practice is. How would we do that? Well, first we would need to explain how people normally practice and the limitations of that approach, and then we would discuss purposeful practice, and so on. At that point we were envisioning various approaches we could use to reach our goals for the book and weighing them, seeing which options seemed best.

As we made our choices, we gradually honed our mental representation of the book until we had something that seemed to meet all of our goals. The simplest way to imagine our mental representation at this stage is to think back to the old outlining technique you learned back in junior high English class. We prepared an outline of chapters, each focused on a particular topic and covering various aspects of that topic. But the representation of the book that we had created was far richer and more complex than a simple outline. We knew, for instance, why each piece was there and what we wanted to accomplish with it. And we had a clear idea of the book’s structure and logic—why one topic followed another—and the interconnections among the various pieces.

We found that this process also forced us to think carefully about how we conceptualized deliberate practice ourselves. We started off with what seemed to be a clear idea of deliberate practice and how to explain it, but as we tried to describe it briefly in a nontechnical way, sometimes we found that it just wasn’t working as well as we would have liked. That would lead us to rethink the best way to explain a concept or to make a point.

For example, when we presented our initial proposal to our agent, Elyse Cheney, she and her colleagues had trouble understanding deliberate practice clearly. In particular, they didn’t get what separates deliberate practice from other forms of practice, other than that it is more effective. This was not their fault, but an indication that we hadn’t made our explanation as readily intelligible as we’d thought. That forced us to rethink how we were presenting deliberate practice—in essence, to come up with a new and better mental representation of how we thought about it and how we wanted others to think about it. It soon occurred to us that the role of mental representations held the key to how we wanted to present deliberate practice.

Initially, we had seen mental representations as being just one aspect of deliberate practice among many that we would present to the reader, but now we began to see them as a central feature—perhaps the central feature—of the book. The main purpose of deliberate practice is to develop effective mental representations, and, as we will discuss shortly, mental representations in turn play a key role in deliberate practice. The key change that occurs in our adaptable brains in response to deliberate practice is the development of better mental representations, which in turn open up new possibilities for improved performance. In short, we came to see our explanation of mental representations as the keystone of the book, without which the rest of the book could not stand.

There was a steady interplay between the writing of the book and our conceptualization of the topic, and as we looked for ways to make our messages clearer to the reader, we would come up with new ways to think about deliberate practice ourselves. Researchers refer to this sort of writing as “knowledge transforming,” as opposed to “knowledge telling,” because the process of writing changes and adds to the knowledge that the writer had when starting out.

This is an example of one way in which expert performers use mental representations to improve their performance: they monitor and evaluate their performance, and, when necessary, they modify their mental representations in order to make them more effective. The more effective the mental representation is, the better the performance will be. We had developed a certain mental representation of the book, but we found out that it had led us to a performance (the explanations in our original proposal) that was not as good as we wished, so we used the feedback we had gotten and modified the representation accordingly. This in turn led us to a much better explanation of deliberate practice.

And so it went throughout the writing of the book. Although it was constantly evolving, our mental representation of the book guided us and informed our decisions about our writing. As we went along, we evaluated each piece—in the later stages with the help of our editor, Eamon Dolan—and when we found weaknesses, we tweaked the representation to fix the problem.

Obviously the mental representation for a book is much larger and more complex than one for a personal letter or a blog post, but the general pattern is the same: to write well, develop a mental representation ahead of time to guide your efforts, then monitor and evaluate your efforts and be ready to modify that representation as necessary.



MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS IN LEARNING



In general, mental representations aren’t just the result of learning a skill; they can also help us learn. Some of the best evidence for this comes from the field of musical performance. Several researchers have examined what differentiates the best musicians from lesser ones, and one of the major differences lies in the quality of the mental representations the best ones create. When practicing a new piece, beginning and intermediate musicians generally lack a good, clear idea of how the music should sound, while advanced musicians have a very detailed mental representation of the music they use to guide their practice and, ultimately, their performance of a piece. In particular, they use their mental representations to provide their own feedback so that they know how close they are to getting the piece right and what they need to do differently to improve. The beginners and intermediate students may have crude representations of the music that allow them to tell, for instance, when they hit a wrong note, but they must rely on feedback from their teachers to identify the more subtle mistakes and weaknesses.

Even among beginning music students, it seems that differences in the quality of how the music is represented make a difference in how effective practice can be. About fifteen years ago two Australian psychologists, Gary McPherson and James Renwick, studied a number of children between the ages of seven and nine who were learning to play various instruments: the flute, the trumpet, the cornet, the clarinet, and the saxophone. Part of the study was to videotape the children as they practiced at home and then to analyze the practice sessions to understand what the children did to make their practice more or less effective.

In particular, the researchers counted the number of mistakes a student made in practicing a piece the first time and the second time and used the improvement from the first time to the second as a measurement of how effectively the student was practicing. They found a wide variation in the amount of improvement. Of all the students they studied, a female cornet player in her first year of learning the instrument made the most mistakes: 11 per minute, on average, on the first times playing pieces during practice sessions. On the second time through, she was still making the same mistakes 70 percent of the time—noticing and correcting only 3 out of every 10 mistakes. By contrast, the best first-year player, a boy who was learning the saxophone, made only 1.4 mistakes per minute on his first times through. And on the second times through, he was making the same mistakes only 20 percent of the time—correcting 8 out of every 10 mistakes. The difference in the percentage of corrections is particularly striking because the saxophone player was already making many fewer mistakes, so he had much less room for improvement.

All of the students had good attitudes and were motivated to improve, so McPherson and Renwick concluded that the differences among the students most likely lay, in large part, in how well the students were able to detect their mistakes—that is, how effective their mental representations of the musical pieces were. The saxophone player had a clear mental representation of the piece that allowed him to recognize most of his mistakes, remember them the next time, and correct them. The cornet player, on the other hand, didn’t seem to have such a well-developed mental representation of what she was playing. The difference between the two was not in desire or effort, the researchers said. The cornet player just didn’t have the same tools with which to improve as the saxophone player did.

McPherson and Renwick didn’t try to understand the precise nature of the mental representations, but other research indicates that the representations could have taken several forms. One would be an aural representation—a clear idea of what a piece should sound like. Musicians at every level use these to guide their practice and their play, and better musicians have far more detailed representations, which include not just the pitch and the length of the notes to be played, but their volume, rise and fall, intonation, vibrato, tremolo, and harmonic relationship with other notes, including notes played on other instruments by other musicians. Good musicians not only recognize these various qualities of musical sound but know how to produce them on their instruments—an understanding that requires its own sort of mental representation, which is in turn quite closely tied to the mental representations of the sounds themselves.

The students McPherson and Renwick studied probably also had developed, to one degree or another, mental representations that connected notes written on a musical score with the fingering necessary to play those notes. Thus, if the saxophonist accidentally placed his fingers in the wrong position for a note, he would probably notice it not only because his horn produced the wrong sound but also because his fingering felt “off”—that is, it didn’t match his mental representation of where his fingers should be placed.

While the study by McPherson and Renwick has the advantage of being very personal—we almost feel as though we know the cornet player and the saxophonist when we’re done—it has the disadvantage of having observed only a few musicians in one school. Fortunately, its results are backed up by a British study of more than three thousand music students, ranging from beginners to experts ready to enter a university-level conservatory.

The researchers found, among other things, that the more accomplished music students were better able to determine when they’d made mistakes and better able to identify difficult sections they needed to focus their efforts on. This implies that the students had more highly developed mental representations of the music they were playing and of their own performances, which allowed them to monitor their practice and spot mistakes. Furthermore, the more advanced music students also had more effective practice techniques. The implication is that they were using their mental representations not only to spot mistakes but also to match appropriate practice techniques with the types of difficulties they were having with the music.

In any area, not just musical performance, the relationship between skill and mental representations is a virtuous circle: the more skilled you become, the better your mental representations are, and the better your mental representations are, the more effectively you can practice to hone your skill.

We can see a more detailed depiction of how an expert uses mental representations through a long-term collaboration between Roger Chaffin, a psychologist at the University of Connecticut, and Gabriela Imreh, an internationally known pianist based in New Jersey. For years they have been working together to understand what goes through Imreh’s head as she studies, practices, and performs a piece of music.

Much of Chaffin’s work with Imreh is reminiscent of how I monitored Steve Faloon’s development of mental representations for memorizing strings of digits. He observes her as she is learning a new piece of music and has her voice her thought processes as she determines how she will play it. He also videotapes these practice sessions so that he has additional clues as to how Imreh is approaching her task.

In one series of sessions, Chaffin followed Imreh as she spent more than thirty hours practicing the third movement of the Italian Concerto of Johann Sebastian Bach, which she was scheduled to play for the first time. The first thing Imreh did when she sight-read the piece was to develop what he called an “artistic image”—a representation of what the piece should sound like when she performed it. Now, Imreh was not coming to this piece cold—she’d heard it many times—but the fact that she was able to create this mental image of the piece simply by reading the score indicates just how highly developed her mental representations of the piano are. Where most of us would see musical symbols on a page, she heard the music in her head.

Much of what Imreh did from that point on was figuring out how to perform the piece so that it matched her artistic image. She began by going through the entire piece and deciding exactly what fingering she would use. Where possible, she would use the standard fingering that pianists learn for particular series of notes, but there were places that required departing from the standard because she wanted that particular passage to sound a certain way. She would try out different options, decide on one, and note it on the score. She also identified different moments in the composition that Chaffin called “expressive turning points”—for instance, a point where her playing would turn from light and lively to more measured and serious. Later she would pick out cues in the music—short passages before a turning point or a technically difficult passage that, when she came to them, would serve as prompts to get ready for what was coming. She also picked out various places where she would add nuanced interpretations of the music.

By putting all of these different elements into an overall map of the piece, Imreh managed to do justice to both the forest and the trees. She formed an image of what the whole piece should sound like, while also giving herself clear images of the details she needed to pay close attention to as she was playing. Her mental representation combined what she thought the music was supposed to sound like with what Imreh had figured out about how to make it sound that way. Although other pianists’ mental representations would likely differ from Imreh’s in the specifics, their overall approaches are likely to be very similar.

Her mental representation also allowed Imreh to deal with a fundamental dilemma facing any classical pianist learning to play a piece. It is crucial that the musician practice and memorize the piece in such a way that the performance can be done almost automatically, with the fingers of each hand playing the proper notes with little or no conscious direction from the pianist; in this way the piece can be performed flawlessly on stage in front of an audience even if the pianist is nervous or excited. On the other hand, the pianist must have a certain amount of spontaneity in order to connect and communicate with the audience. Imreh did this by using her mental map of the piece. She would play much of the piece just as she always practiced it, with her fingers going through well-rehearsed motions, but she always knew exactly where she was in the piece because she’d identified various points that served as landmarks. Some of these were performance landmarks that would signal to Imreh that, for example, a change in fingering was approaching, while others were what Chaffin called “expressive landmarks.” These indicated places where she could vary her playing to capture a particular emotion, depending on how she felt and how the audience was responding. That allowed her to maintain spontaneity within the demanding constraints of performing a complicated piece before a live audience.



PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES ARE MENTAL TOO



As we’ve just seen from several studies, musicians rely on mental representations to improve both the physical and cognitive aspects of their specialties. And mental representations are essential to activities we see as almost purely physical. Indeed, any expert in any field can be rightly seen as a high-achieving intellectual where that field is concerned. This applies to pretty much any activity in which the positioning and movement of a person’s body is evaluated for artistic expression by human judges. Think of gymnastics, diving, figure skating, or dancing. Performers in these areas must develop clear mental representations of how their bodies are supposed to move to generate the artistic appearance of their performance routines. But even in areas where artistic form is not explicitly judged, it is still important to train the body to move in particularly efficient ways. Swimmers learn to perform their strokes in ways that maximize thrust and minimize drag. Runners learn to stride in ways that maximize speed and endurance while conserving energy. Pole-vaulters, tennis players, martial artists, golfers, hitters in baseball, three-point shooters in basketball, weightlifters, skeet shooters, and downhill skiers—for all of these athletes proper form is key to good performance, and the performers with the best mental representations will have an advantage over the rest.

In these areas too, the virtuous circle rules: honing the skill improves mental representation, and mental representation helps hone the skill. There is a bit of a chicken-and-egg component to this. Take figure skating: it’s hard to have a clear mental representation of what a double axel feels like until you’ve done it, and, likewise, it is difficult to do a clean double axel without a good mental representation of one. That sounds paradoxical, but it isn’t really. You work up to a double axel bit by bit, assembling the mental representations as you go.

It’s like a staircase that you climb as you build it. Each step of your ascent puts you in a position to build the next step. Then you build that step, and you’re in a position to build the next one. And so on. Your existing mental representations guide your performance and allow you to both monitor and judge that performance. As you push yourself to do something new—to develop a new skill or sharpen an old one—you are also expanding and sharpening your mental representations, which will in turn make it possible for you to do more than you could before.


