# Harnessing Adaptability

2

Harnessing Adaptability

IF YOU’RE A BODYBUILDER or just someone lifting weights to add some muscle, it is easy to track the results as you challenge your biceps, triceps, quadriceps, pecs, delts, lats, traps, abs, glutes, calves, and hamstrings. A tape measure works, or you can simply look in the mirror and admire your progress. If you’re running or biking or swimming to increase your endurance, you can track your progress by your heart rate, your breathing, and how long you can keep going until your muscles falter due to lactic acid buildup.

But if your challenge is mental—becoming proficient at calculus, say, or learning how to play a musical instrument or speak a new language—it’s different. There is no easy way to observe the resulting changes in your brain as it adapts to the increasing demands being placed on it. There is no soreness in your cortex the day after a particularly tough training session. You don’t have to go out and buy new hats because the old ones are now too small. You don’t develop a six-pack on your forehead. And because you can’t see any changes in your brain, it’s easy to assume that there really isn’t much going on.

That would be a mistake, however. There is a growing body of evidence that both the structure and the function of the brain change in response to various sorts of mental training, in much the same way as your muscles and cardiovascular system respond to physical training. With the help of such brain-imaging techniques as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), neuroscientists have begun to study how the brains of people with particular skills differ from the brains of people without those skills and to explore which sorts of training produce which types of changes. Although there is still a tremendous amount to learn in this area, we already know enough to have a clear idea of how purposeful practice and deliberate practice work to increase both our physical and mental capabilities and make it possible to do things that we never could before.

Much of what we know about how the body adapts to training comes from studies of runners, weightlifters, and various other athletes. Interestingly enough, however, some of the best studies to date of how the brain changes in response to extended training were carried out not with musicians or chess players or mathematicians—some of the more traditional subjects in studies of the effects of practice on performance—but instead with taxi drivers.



THE BRAINS OF LONDON CABBIES
> Các tài xế taxi ở London phải trải qua một bài test về tất cả các tuyến đường, các địa điểm ở London
> Hồi hải mã của những tài xế taxi ở London lớn hơn đáng kể so với những người khác


Few cities in the world can baffle a GPS system like London can. To start with, there is no grid of thoroughfares that can be used for orientation and routing as you will find in Manhattan or Paris or Tokyo. Instead the city’s major streets are set at odd angles to each other. They curve and they squiggle. One-way streets abound, there are traffic circles and dead ends all over, and through the middle of everything runs the Thames River, spanned by a dozen bridges in central London, at least one of which—and sometimes more—will likely have to be crossed during a trip of any length through the city. And the erratic numbering system doesn’t always tell you exactly where to find a particular address even when you’ve found the right street.

Thus the best advice for visitors is to forget about renting a car with a navigational system and instead rely on the city’s cabbies. They’re ubiquitous—some twenty-five thousand of them driving around in their big, black, boxy cars that are the automotive equivalent of sensible shoes—and they are astonishingly good at getting you from point A to point B in the most efficient way possible, taking into account not only the lengths of the various possible paths, but the time of day, the expected traffic, temporary roadwork and road closings, and any other details that might be relevant to the trip. Nor do points A and B have to be traditional street addresses. Suppose you’d like to revisit that funky little hat shop in Charing Cross whose name you don’t quite recall—Lord’s or Lear or something like that—but you do remember that there is a little shop next door that sells cupcakes. Well, that will be enough. Tell all that to your cabbie, and as soon as is automotively possible you will find yourself in front of Laird London, 23A New Row.

As you might imagine, given the challenges of finding one’s way in London, not just anyone can be a cabbie. Indeed, to become a licensed London taxi driver one must pass a series of examinations that have been described as, collectively, the most difficult test in the world. The test is administered by Transport for London, and that agency describes “the Knowledge”—what a prospective driver must learn—as follows:



To achieve the required standard to be licensed as an “All London” taxi driver you will need a thorough knowledge, primarily, of the area within a six-mile radius of Charing Cross. You will need to know: all the streets; housing estates; parks and open spaces; government offices and departments; financial and commercial centres; diplomatic premises; town halls; registry offices; hospitals; places of worship; sports stadiums and leisure centres; airline offices; stations; hotels; clubs; theatres; cinemas; museums; art galleries; schools; colleges and universities; police stations and headquarters buildings; civil, criminal and coroner’s courts; prisons; and places of interest to tourists. In fact, anywhere a taxi passenger might ask to be taken.





That area within six miles of Charing Cross contains approximately twenty-five thousand streets. But a prospective cabbie must be familiar with more than just streets and buildings. Any landmark is fair game. According to a 2014 story about London taxi drivers in the New York Times Magazine, one prospective driver was asked about the location of a statue of two mice with a piece of cheese; the statue, on the façade of a building, was just one foot tall.

More to the point, prospective taxi drivers must demonstrate that they can get from one point in the city to another as efficiently as possible. Tests consist of a series of “runs” in which the examiner gives two points in London and the examinee must provide the precise location of each of the points and then describe the best route between them, turn by turn, naming each street in the sequence. Each run earns a numerical score based on its accuracy, and as the prospective driver accumulates points, the tests get harder and harder, with the endpoints becoming more obscure and the routes longer, more complicated, and more convoluted. Half or more of the prospective drivers end up dropping out, but those who stay with it and earn their licenses have internalized London to a degree that Google Maps, with its satellite images, camera cars, and unfathomable memory and processing power, can only vaguely approximate.

To master the Knowledge, prospective cabbies—who are known as “Knowledge boys” and, occasionally, “Knowledge girls”—spend years driving from place to place in London, making notes of what is where and how to get from here to there. The first step is to master a list of 320 runs in the guidebook provided to taxi-driver candidates. For a given run, a candidate will generally first figure out the shortest route by physically traveling the various possible routes, usually by motorbike, and then will explore the areas around the beginning and the end of the run. This means wandering around within a quarter mile or so of each of those places, taking notes on which buildings and which landmarks are in the vicinity. After having repeated this process 320 times, the prospective cabbie has accumulated a foundational set of 320 best routes around London and has also explored—and taken notes on—pretty much every bit of the core area within six miles of Charing Cross. It is a start, but successful candidates keep challenging themselves to determine the best routes for many other runs that are not on the list and to take note of buildings and landmarks that they might have missed before or that might have recently appeared. Indeed, even after passing all the tests and getting licensed, London taxi drivers continue to increase and hone their knowledge of London’s streets.

The resulting memory and navigational skills are nothing short of astonishing, and so London taxi drivers have proved irresistible to psychologists interested in learning and, particularly, in the learning of navigational skills. By far the most in-depth studies of the cabbies—and the ones that have the most to tell us about how training affects the brain—have been carried out by Eleanor Maguire, a neuroscientist at University College London.

In one of her earliest works on the taxi drivers, published in 2000, Maguire used magnetic resonance imaging to look at the brains of sixteen male taxi drivers and compare them with the brains of fifty other males of similar ages who were not taxi drivers. She looked in particular at the hippocampus, that seahorse-shaped part of the brain involved in the development of memories. The hippocampus is particularly engaged by spatial navigation and in remembering the location of things in space. (Each person actually has two hippocampi, one on each side of the brain.) For instance, species of birds that store food in different places and thus must be able to remember the location of these various caches have relatively larger hippocampi than closely related birds that don’t store food in different places. More to the point, the size of the hippocampus is quite flexible in at least some species of birds and can grow by as much as 30 percent in response to a bird’s food-storing experiences. But would the same thing be true in humans?

Maguire found that a particular part of the hippocampus—the posterior, or rear, part—was larger in the taxi drivers than in the other subjects. Furthermore, the more time that a person had spent as a taxi driver, the larger the posterior hippocampi were. In another study that Maguire carried out a few years later, she compared the brains of London taxi drivers with London bus drivers. Like the taxi drivers, the bus drivers spent their days driving around London; the difference between them was that the bus drivers repeated the same routes over and over and thus never had to figure out the best way to get from point A to point B. Maguire found that the posterior hippocampi of the taxi drivers were significantly larger than the same parts of the brain in the bus drivers. The clear implication was that whatever was responsible for the difference in the size of the posterior hippocampi was not related to the driving itself but rather was related specifically to the navigational skills that the job required.

That still left one loose end, however: perhaps the taxi drivers in the studies had started out with larger posterior hippocampi that gave them an advantage in finding their way around London, and the extensive testing they went through was nothing more than a weeding-out process that zeroed in on those prospective drivers who were naturally better equipped to be able to learn their way around the maze that is London.

Maguire addressed this issue quite simply and powerfully: she followed a group of prospective taxi drivers from the time they started training for their licenses until the point at which all of them had either passed the tests and become licensed cabbies or else had given up and gone on to do something else. In particular, she recruited seventy-nine prospective drivers—all of them male—who were just starting training, as well as another thirty-one males of similar ages to serve as controls. When she scanned all their brains, she found no difference in the sizes of the posterior hippocampi between the prospective drivers and the controls.

Four years later she revisited the two groups of subjects. By this time forty-one of the trainees had become licensed London taxi drivers, while thirty-eight had stopped training or failed their tests. So at this point there were three groups to compare: the new taxi drivers who had learned enough about London’s streets to pass the series of tests, the trainees who had not learned enough to pass, and the group who had not ever trained at all. Once again Maguire scanned their brains and calculated the size of the posterior hippocampi in each.

What she found would have been no surprise if she had been measuring biceps in bodybuilders, but she wasn’t—she was measuring the sizes of different parts of the brain—and so the result was startling. The volume of the posterior hippocampi had gotten significantly larger in the group of trainees who had continued their training and had become licensed taxi drivers. By contrast, there was no change in the size of the posterior hippocampi among the prospective taxi drivers who had failed to become licensed (either because they simply stopped training or because they could not pass the tests) or among the subjects who had never had anything to do with the taxi training program. The years spent mastering the Knowledge had enlarged precisely that part of the brain that is responsible for navigating from one place to another.

Maguire’s study, which was published in 2011, is perhaps the most dramatic evidence we have that the human brain grows and changes in response to intense training. Furthermore, the clear implication of her study is that the extra neurons and other tissue in the posterior hippocampi of the licensed cabbies underlie their increased navigational capabilities. You can think about the posterior hippocampi of a London taxi driver as the neural equivalent of the massively developed arms and shoulders of a male gymnast. Years of work on the rings and pommel horse and parallel bars and floor exercises have built muscles that are exquisitely suited for the sorts of movements he performs on those different pieces of apparatus—and, indeed, that make it possible for him to do all sorts of gymnastics moves that were simply not within his reach when he began training. The posterior hippocampi of the taxi drivers are equally “bulked up,” but with brain tissue, not muscle fiber.



ADAPTABILITY

[[Não bộ con người có khả năng thích ứng tối]]

Until the first decade of the twenty-first century, most scientists would have flat out denied that something like what Maguire has seen in the brains of London cabbies was even possible. The general belief was that once a person reached adulthood, the wiring of his or her brain was pretty much fixed. Sure, everyone understood that there had to be tweaks here and there when you learned something new, but these were thought to be little more than the strengthening of some neural connections and the weakening of others, because the overall structure of the brain and its various neural networks were fixed. This idea went hand in hand with the belief that individual differences in abilities were due mainly to genetically determined differences in the brain’s wiring and that learning was just a way of fulfilling one’s genetic potential. One common metaphor depicted the brain as a computer: learning was like loading some data or installing new software—it allowed you to do some things you couldn’t do before, but your ultimate performance would always be limited by such things as the number of bytes in your random-access memory (RAM) and the power of your central processing unit (CPU).

By contrast, the body’s adaptability has always been easier to recognize, as we’ve noted. One of my favorite examples of physical adaptability involves pushups. If you’re a relatively fit male in your twenties, you may be able to do 40 or 50; if you can do 100, you can impress your friends and probably win a few bets. So what might you guess is the world record for pushups—500 or 1,000? In 1980 Minoru Yoshida of Japan did 10,507 pushups nonstop. After that, Guinness World Records stopped accepting submissions for the number of pushups done with no rest periods and switched to the most pushups performed in twenty-four hours with resting allowed. In 1993 Charles Servizio of the United States set what remains the world record in that category by doing 46,001 pushups in 21 hours and 21 minutes.

Or consider pull-ups. Even relatively fit guys can generally do only 10 or 15, although if you’ve really been working out, you may have worked your way up to 40 or 50. In 2014 Jan Kareš of the Czech Republic did 4,654 in twelve hours.

In short, the human body is incredibly adaptable. It is not just the skeletal muscles, but also the heart, the lungs, the circulatory system, the body’s energy stores, and more—everything that goes into physical strength and stamina. There may be limits, but there is no indication that we have reached them yet.

From Maguire’s work and that of others, we’re now learning that the brain has a very similar degree and variety of adaptability.

Some of the earliest observations of this sort of adaptability—or “plasticity,” as neuroscientists would say—appeared in studies of how the brains of blind or deaf people “rewire” themselves to find new uses for the parts of the brain that are normally dedicated to processing sights or sounds but that in these people have nothing to do. Most blind people cannot see because of problems with their eyes or optic nerve, but the visual cortex and other parts of the brain are still fully functional; they’re just not getting any input from the eyes. If the brain actually were hardwired like a computer, these visual regions would sit forever idle. We now know, however, that the brain reroutes some of its neurons so that these otherwise-unused areas are put to work doing other things, particularly things related to the remaining senses, which blind people must rely on to get information about their surroundings.

To read, for example, the blind run their fingertips over the raised dots that make up the Braille alphabet. When researchers use MRI machines to watch the brains of blind subjects as they read words in Braille, one of the parts of the brain that they see lighting up is the visual cortex. In people with normal sight, the visual cortex would light up in response to input from the eyes, not the fingertips, but in the blind, the visual cortex helps them interpret the fingertip sensations they get from brushing over the groups of raised dots that make up the Braille letters.
[[Chữ nổi Braille]]

Interestingly enough, it is not just otherwise-unused areas of the brain where rewiring occurs. If you practice something enough, your brain will repurpose neurons to help with the task even if they already have another job to do. Perhaps the most compelling evidence of this comes from an experiment done in the late 1990s, when a group of researchers examined the parts of the brain that controlled various fingers on the hands of a group of highly skilled Braille readers.

The subjects were three-fingered Braille readers—that is, they used their index fingers to read the patterns of dots that make up individual letters, their middle fingers to pick out the spaces between the letters, and their ring fingers to keep track of the particular line they were reading. The wiring in the part of the brain that controls the hands is normally set up so that each individual finger has a distinct part of the brain dedicated to it. This is what makes it possible for us to tell, for example, which fingertip is being touched by a pencil tip or a thumbtack without looking at our fingers. The subjects in the study were Braille instructors who used their fingers to read Braille several hours each day. What the researchers discovered was that this steady use of the three fingers had caused the areas of the brain devoted to each of those fingers to grow so much that those areas eventually overlapped. As a result, the subjects were exceptionally sensitive to touch on these fingers—they could detect a much gentler touch than sighted subjects—but they often couldn’t tell which of the three fingers had been touched.

These studies of brain plasticity in blind subjects—and similar studies in deaf subjects—tell us that the brain’s structure and function are not fixed. They change in response to use. It is possible to shape the brain—your brain, my brain, anybody’s brain—in the ways that we desire through conscious, deliberate training.

Researchers are just beginning to explore the various ways that this plasticity can be put to work. One of the most striking results to date could have implications for anyone who suffers from age-related farsightedness—which is just about everyone over the age of fifty. The study, which was carried out by American and Israeli neuroscientists and vision researchers, was reported in 2012. Those scientists assembled a group of middle-aged volunteers, all of whom had difficulty focusing on nearby objects. The official name of the condition is presbyopia, and it results from a problem with the eye itself, which loses elasticity in its lens, making it more difficult to focus well enough to make out small details. There is also an associated difficulty in detecting contrasts between light and dark areas, which exacerbates the difficulty in focusing. The consequences are a boon for optometrists and opticians and a bother for the over-fifty crowd, nearly all of whom need glasses to read or perform close-up work.

The researchers had their subjects come into the lab three or so times a week for three months and spend thirty minutes each visit training their vision. The subjects were asked to spot a small image against a background that was very similar in shade to the spot; that is, there was very little contrast between the image and the background. Spotting these images required intense concentration and effort. Over time the subjects learned to more quickly and accurately determine the presence of these images. At the end of three months the subjects were tested to see what size type they could read. On average they were able to read letters that were 60 percent smaller than they could at the beginning of the training, and every single subject had improved. Furthermore, after the training every subject was able to read a newspaper without glasses, something a majority of them couldn’t do beforehand. They also were able to read faster than before.

Surprisingly, none of this improvement was caused by changes in the eyes, which had the same stiffness and difficulty focusing as before. Instead, the improvement was due to changes in the part of the brain that interprets visual signals from the eye. Although the researchers couldn’t pinpoint exactly what those changes were, they believe that the brain learned to “de-blur” images. Blurry images result from a combination of two different weaknesses in vision—an inability to see small details and difficulties in detecting differences in contrast—and both of these issues can be helped by the image processing carried out in the brain, in much the same way that image-processing software in a computer or a camera can sharpen an image by such techniques as manipulating the contrast. The researchers who carried out the study believe that their training exercises taught the subjects’ brains to do a better job of processing, which in turn allowed the subjects to discern smaller details without any improvement in the signal from the eyes.



CHALLENGING HOMEOSTASIS



Why should the human body and brain be so adaptable in the first place? It all stems, ironically enough, from the fact that the individual cells and tissues try to keep everything the same as much as possible.

The human body has a preference for stability. It maintains a steady internal temperature. It keeps a stable blood pressure and heart rate. It keeps the blood glucose levels and pH balance (acidity/alkalinity level) steady. It maintains a reasonably constant weight from day to day. None of these things are completely static, of course—pulse rate increases with exercise, for instance, and body weight goes up or down with overeating or dieting—but these changes are usually temporary, and the body eventually gets back to where it was. The technical term for this is “homeostasis,” which simply refers to the tendency of a system—any sort of system, but most often a living creature or some part of a living creature—to act in a way that maintains its own stability.

Individual cells like stability as well. They maintain a certain level of water and also regulate the balance of positive and negative ions, particularly sodium and potassium ions, and various small molecules by controlling which ions and molecules stay and which exit through the cell membrane. More important to us is the fact that cells require a stable environment if they are to function effectively. If the surrounding tissues get too hot or too cold, if their fluid level moves too far outside of the preferred range, if the oxygen level drops too far, or if the energy supplies get too low, it damages the functioning of the cells. If the changes are too big for too long, the cells start to die.

Thus, the body is equipped with various feedback mechanisms that act to maintain the status quo. Consider what happens when you engage in some sort of vigorous physical activity. The contraction of muscle fibers causes the individual muscle cells to expend their supplies of energy and oxygen, which are replenished from nearby blood vessels. But now the level of oxygen and energy supplies in the bloodstream drops, which leads the body to take various measures in response. The breathing rate goes up to increase oxygen levels in the blood and to clear out more carbon dioxide. Various energy stores are converted into the sort of energy supply that the muscles can use and feed into the bloodstream. Meanwhile, blood circulation increases in order to better distribute the oxygen and energy supplies to those parts of the body that need them.

As long as the physical exercise is not so strenuous that it strains the body’s homeostatic mechanisms, the exercise will do very little to prompt physical changes in the body. From the body’s perspective, there is no reason to change; everything is working as it should.

It’s a different matter when you engage in a sustained, vigorous physical activity that pushes the body beyond the point where the homeostatic mechanisms can compensate. Your body’s systems and cells find themselves in abnormal states, with abnormally low levels of oxygen and various energy-related compounds, such as glucose, adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The metabolism of the various cells can no longer proceed as usual, so there are different sets of biochemical reactions going on in the cells, producing an entirely different suite of biochemical products than the cell usually produces. The cells are not happy with this altered state of affairs, and they respond by calling up some different genes from the cells’ DNA. (Most of the genes in the DNA of a cell are inactive at any given time, and the cell will “switch on” and “switch off” various genes, depending on what it needs at the time.) These newly activated genes will switch on or ramp up various biochemical systems within the cell, which will change its behavior in ways that are intended to respond to the fact that the cells and surrounding systems have been pushed out of their comfort zone.

The exact details of what goes on inside a cell in response to such stresses are extremely complicated, and researchers are only just now beginning to unravel them. For example, in one study on rats the scientists conducting the study counted 112 different genes that were turned on when the workload on a particular muscle in the rear legs of the rats was sharply increased. Judging by the particular genes that were switched on, the response included such things as a change in the metabolism of the muscle cells, changes in their structure, and a change in the rate at which new muscle cells were formed. The eventual result of all of these changes was a strengthening of the rats’ muscles so that they could handle the increased workload. They had been pushed out of their comfort zone, and the muscles responded by getting strong enough to establish a new comfort zone. Homeostasis had been reestablished.

This is the general pattern for how physical activity creates changes in the body: when a body system—certain muscles, the cardiovascular system, or something else—is stressed to the point that homeostasis can no longer be maintained, the body responds with changes that are intended to reestablish homeostasis. Suppose, for example, that you begin a program of aerobic exercise—say, jogging three times a week for half an hour each time, keeping your heart rate at the recommended level of 70 percent of your maximum heart rate (which works out to something over 140 beats per minute for younger adults). The sustained activity will, among other things, lead to low levels of oxygen in the capillaries that supply your leg muscles. Your body will respond by growing new capillaries in order to provide more oxygen to the muscle cells in your legs and return them to their comfort zone.

This is how the body’s desire for homeostasis can be harnessed to drive changes: push it hard enough and for long enough, and it will respond by changing in ways that make that push easier to do. You will have gotten a little stronger, built a little more endurance, developed a little more coordination. But there is a catch: once the compensatory changes have occurred—new muscle fibers have grown and become more efficient, new capillaries have grown, and so on—the body can handle the physical activity that had previously stressed it. It is comfortable again. The changes stop. So to keep the changes happening, you have to keep upping the ante: run farther, run faster, run uphill. If you don’t keep pushing and pushing and pushing some more, the body will settle into homeostasis, albeit at a different level than before, and you will stop improving.

This explains the importance of staying just outside your comfort zone: you need to continually push to keep the body’s compensatory changes coming, but if you push too far outside your comfort zone, you risk injuring yourself and actually setting yourself back.

This, at least, is the way the body responds to physical activity. Scientists know much less about how the brain changes in response to mental challenges. One major difference between the body and the brain is that the cells in the adult brain do not generally divide and form new brain cells. There are a few exceptions, such as in the hippocampus, where new neurons can grow, but in most parts of the brain the changes that occur in response to a mental challenge—such as the contrast training used to improve people’s vision—won’t include the development of new neurons. Instead, the brain rewires those networks in various ways—by strengthening or weakening the various connections between neurons and also by adding new connections or getting rid of old ones. There can also be an increase in the amount of myelin, the insulating sheath that forms around nerve cells and allows nerve signals to travel more quickly; myelination can increase the speed of nerve impulses by as much as ten times. Because these networks of neurons are responsible for thought, memories, controlling movement, interpreting sensory signals, and all the other functions of the brain, rewiring and speeding up these networks can make it possible to do various things—reading a newspaper without glasses, say, or quickly determining the best route from point A to point B—that one couldn’t do before.

In the brain, the greater the challenge, the greater the changes—up to a point. Recent studies have shown that learning a new skill is much more effective at triggering structural changes in the brain than simply continuing to practice a skill that one has already learned. On the other hand, pushing too hard for too long can lead to burnout and ineffective learning. The brain, like the body, changes most quickly in that sweet spot where it is pushed outside—but not too far outside—its comfort zone.



SHAPING THE BRAIN



The fact that the human brain and body respond to challenges by developing new abilities underlies the effectiveness of purposeful and deliberate practice. The training of a London taxi driver or an Olympic gymnast or a violinist at a music academy is, in essence, a method of harnessing the adaptability of the brain and body to develop abilities that would otherwise be out of reach.

The best place to see this in action is in the development of musical ability. Over the past two decades brain researchers have studied in great detail how musical training affects the brain and how those effects in turn make possible extraordinary musical performance. The best known study was published in 1995 in the journal Science. Working with four German scientists, the psychologist Edward Taub at the University of Alabama at Birmingham recruited six violinists, two cellists, and a guitarist, all of whom were right-handed, to have their brains scanned. They also recruited six nonmusicians to serve as controls against whom the musicians would be compared. Taub wanted to see if there was any difference between the two groups in the areas of their brains that were devoted to controlling their fingers.

Taub was most interested in the fingers on the musicians’ left hands. Playing the violin, cello, or guitar requires exceptional control of those fingers. The fingers move up and down the neck of the instrument and from string to string, sometimes at incredible speeds, and they must be placed with extreme accuracy. Furthermore, many of the sounds coaxed from the instruments, such as vibrato, involve some sliding or vibrating motion of a finger in place, which generally requires extensive practice to master. The left thumb has fewer responsibilities, mainly just providing pressure on the back of the neck, and the right hand generally has much less to do than the left—mostly just holding the bow for violinists and cellists and strumming or picking for guitarists. In short, most of a string player’s training is aimed at improving control of the fingers on the left hand. The question Taub asked was, What effect will this have on the brain?

Taub’s team used a magnetoencephalograph—a machine that maps out brain activity by detecting tiny magnetic fields in the brain—to determine which parts of the subjects’ brains controlled which fingers. In particular, the experimenters would touch a subject’s individual fingers and observe which parts of the brain responded to each touch. They found that the region of the brain controlling the left hand was significantly larger in the musicians than in the nonmusicians—and, in particular, that the brain regions controlling the fingers had taken over a section of the brain region that was normally devoted to the palm. Furthermore, the earlier a musician had started to play his or her instrument, the greater the expansion was. By contrast, the researchers found no difference between the musicians and nonmusicians in the size of the region controlling the fingers of the right hand.

The implication was clear: Years of practice on a stringed instrument had caused the area of the brain that controls the fingers of the left hand to gradually expand, resulting in a greater ability to control those fingers.

In the twenty years since that study, other researchers have expanded on the results and described a variety of ways that musical training affects brain structure and function. For example, the cerebellum—a part of the brain that plays an important role in controlling movements—is larger in musicians than in nonmusicians, and the more hours of training a musician has put in, the larger the cerebellum is. Musicians have more gray matter—the brain tissue that contains neurons—than nonmusicians do in various parts of the cortex, including the somatosensory region (touch and other senses), the superior parietal region (sensory input from the hands), and the premotor cortex (planning movements and guiding movements in space).

The details of exactly what happens to which region of the brain can be daunting to anyone who is not trained in neuroscience, but the big picture is clear: musical training modifies the structure and function of the brain in various ways that result in an increased capacity for playing music. In other words, the most effective forms of practice are doing more than helping you learn to play a musical instrument; they are actually increasing your ability to play. With such practice you are modifying the parts of the brain you use when playing music and, in a sense, increasing your own musical “talent.”

Although less of this sort of research has been done in areas other than music, in every area that scientists have studied, the findings are the same: long-term training results in changes in those parts of the brain that are relevant to the particular skill being developed.

Some of these studies have focused on purely intellectual skills, such as mathematical ability. For example, the inferior parietal lobule has significantly more gray matter in mathematicians than in nonmathematicians. This part of the brain is involved in mathematical calculations and in visualizing objects in space, something that is important in many areas of math. It also happens to be a part of the brain that caught the attention of the neuroscientists who examined Albert Einstein’s brain. They found that Einstein’s inferior parietal lobule was significantly larger than average and that its shape was particularly unusual, which led them to speculate that his inferior parietal lobule may have played a crucial role in his ability to perform abstract mathematical thinking. Could it be that people like Einstein are simply born with beefier-than-usual inferior parietal lobules and thus have some innate capacity to be good at mathematical thinking? You might think so, but the researchers who carried out the study on the size of that part of the brain in mathematicians and nonmathematicians found that the longer someone had worked as a mathematician, the more gray matter he or she had in the right inferior parietal lobule—which would suggest that the increased size was a product of extended mathematical thinking, not something the person was born with.

A number of studies have examined skills that have both a mental and a physical component, such as playing music. One recent investigation looked at the brains of glider pilots versus nonpilots and found that the brains of the pilots had more gray area in several different regions, including the left ventral premotor cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the supplementary eye field. These regions seem to be involved in such things as learning to control the stick that one uses to fly a glider, comparing the visual signals that one gets when flying with the body-balance signals that indicate the orientation of the glider, and controlling the movements of the eyes.

Even in the case of what we usually think of as purely “physical skills,” such as swimming or gymnastics, the brain plays a major role because these activities require careful control of the body’s movements, and research has found that practice produces brain changes. For instance, cortical thickness, a way of measuring the amount of gray matter in a brain area, is greater in competitive divers than in nondivers in three specific regions, all of which play a role in visualizing and controlling the movements of the body.

Although the specific details vary from skill to skill, the overall pattern is consistent: Regular training leads to changes in the parts of the brain that are challenged by the training. The brain adapts to these challenges by rewiring itself in ways that increase its ability to carry out the functions required by the challenges. This is the basic message that should be taken away from the research on the effects of training on the brain, but there are a few additional details that are worth noting.

First, the effects of training on the brain can vary with age in several ways. The most important way is that younger brains—those of children and adolescents—are more adaptable than adult brains are, so training can have larger effects in younger people. Because the young brain is developing in various ways, training at early ages can actually shape the course of later development, leading to significant changes. This is “the bent-twig effect.” If you push a small twig slightly away from its normal pattern of growth, you can cause a major change in the ultimate location of the branch that grows from that twig; pushing on a branch that is already developed has much less effect.

One example of this effect is that adult pianists generally have more white matter in certain regions of the brain than nonmusicians do, with the difference being totally due to the amount of time spent practicing in childhood. The earlier a child gets started on the piano, the more white matter that pianist will have as an adult. So while you can learn to play the piano as an adult, it will not result in the same amount of extra white matter that would be produced if you learned to play as a child. At present no one knows what the practical implications of this are, but, generally speaking, more white matter leads to nerve signals being transmitted more quickly, so it seems likely that practicing the piano as a child will lead to certain neurological advantages that you just can’t match with practice as an adult.

A second detail worth noting is that developing certain parts of the brain through prolonged training can come at a cost: in many cases people who have developed one skill or ability to an extraordinary degree seem to have regressed in another area. Maguire’s study of the London taxi drivers provides perhaps the best example. At the end of the four years, when the trainees had either finished the course and become licensed drivers or had stopped trying, she tested her subjects’ memory in two ways. One involved knowing the locations of various London landmarks, and at this the subjects who had become licensed drivers did far better than the rest of the subjects. The second was a standard test of spatial memory—remembering a complex figure after a thirty-minute delay—and on this the licensed drivers did much worse than the group who had never been trained to become taxi drivers. By contrast, the trainees who had dropped out scored about the same as the subjects who had never trained. Because all three groups scored equally well on this memory test at the start of the four-year period, the only explanation was that the licensed cabbies, by developing their memories of London streets, had done something to cause a decline in this other sort of memory. Although we don’t know for sure what caused that, it seems likely that the intense training caused the trainees’ brains to devote an increasingly large segment to this sort of memory, leaving less gray matter to devote to other sorts of memory.

Finally, the cognitive and physical changes caused by training require upkeep. Stop training, and they start to go away. Astronauts who spend months in space without gravity to work against come back to Earth and find it difficult to walk. Athletes who have to stop training because of a broken bone or torn ligament lose much of their strength and endurance in the limbs they cannot exercise. Similar things have been seen with athletes who have volunteered for studies in which they must lie in bed for a month or so. Strength fades. Speed diminishes. Endurance wilts.

And something similar is true with the brain. When Maguire studied a group of retired London taxi drivers, she found that they had less gray matter in their posterior hippocampi than did active taxi drivers, although they still had more than retired subjects who had never been taxi drivers. Once these taxi drivers had stopped using their navigational memory every day, the brain changes that had been the result of that work started to disappear.



BUILDING YOUR OWN POTENTIAL



Once we understand the adaptability of the brain and the body in this way, we start to think about human potential in an entirely different light, and it points us to an entirely different approach to learning.

Consider this: Most people live lives that are not particularly physically challenging. They sit at a desk, or if they move around, it’s not a lot. They aren’t running and jumping, they aren’t lifting heavy objects or throwing things long distances, and they aren’t performing maneuvers that require tremendous balance and coordination. Thus they settle into a low level of physical capabilities—enough for day-to-day activities and maybe even hiking or biking or playing golf or tennis on the weekends, but far from the level of physical capabilities that a highly trained athlete possesses. These “normal” people cannot run a mile in under five minutes or ten miles in under an hour; they cannot throw a baseball three hundred feet or hit a golf ball three hundred yards; they cannot do triple gainers off the high board or triple axels on ice skates or triple backflips in a gymnastics floor routine. These are the sorts of things that require far more practice than most people are willing to devote, but—and this is important—they are also the sorts of abilities that can be developed because the human body is so adaptable and responsive to training. The reason that most people don’t possess these extraordinary physical capabilities isn’t because they don’t have the capacity for them, but rather because they’re satisfied to live in the comfortable rut of homeostasis and never do the work that is required to get out of it. They live in the world of “good enough.”

The same thing is true for all the mental activities we engage in, from writing a report to driving a car, from teaching a class to running an organization, from selling houses to performing brain surgery. We learn enough to get by in our day-to-day lives, but once we reach that point, we seldom push to go beyond good enough. We do very little that challenges our brains to develop new gray matter or white matter or to rewire entire sections in the way that an aspiring London taxi driver or violin student might. And, for the most part, that’s okay. “Good enough” is generally good enough. But it’s important to remember that the option exists. If you wish to become significantly better at something, you can.

And here is the key difference between the traditional approach to learning and the purposeful-practice or deliberate-practice approaches: The traditional approach is not designed to challenge homeostasis. It assumes, consciously or not, that learning is all about fulfilling your innate potential and that you can develop a particular skill or ability without getting too far out of your comfort zone. In this view, all that you are doing with practice—indeed, all that you can do—is to reach a fixed potential.

With deliberate practice, however, the goal is not just to reach your potential but to build it, to make things possible that were not possible before. This requires challenging homeostasis—getting out of your comfort zone—and forcing your brain or your body to adapt. But once you do this, learning is no longer just a way of fulfilling some genetic destiny; it becomes a way of taking control of your destiny and shaping your potential in ways that you choose.

The obvious next question is, What is the best way to challenge homeostasis and develop that potential? We will spend much of the rest of the book answering that question, but before we do that, we need to address an issue that we have glossed over in this chapter: What exactly are we trying to improve about our brains? It’s pretty obvious what leads to improved physical abilities. If you build more and larger muscle fibers, you get stronger. If you improve your muscles’ energy reserves, your lung capacity, your heart’s pumping capacity, and the capacity of your circulatory system, you build your endurance. But what changes are you making in your brain as you train to be a musician, a mathematician, a taxi driver, or a surgeon? Surprisingly, there is a common theme to the changes in all of these areas, and understanding that is the key to understanding how people develop extraordinary abilities in any area of human performance with a mental component—which, when you think about it, is just about all of them. We discuss that next.


